.\" Manual page for consh.
.\" View with:  man ./man/consh.1     Render text:  man ./man/consh.1 | cat
.TH CONSH 1 "July 14, 2026" "consh" "Consh Manual"
.SH NAME
consh \- a Common Lisp Unix shell where pipelines carry objects, not bytes
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B consh
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B consh
is an interactive Unix shell implemented as a Common Lisp (SBCL) image.
It is deliberately
.B not
POSIX\-compatible.  Its defining idea is that a pipeline carries a stream of
CLOS objects, not a stream of bytes: external commands are wrapped by
generic\-function parsers that enrich their output into typed objects, failures
are conditions with restarts, and jobs are objects combining subprocesses and
Lisp threads.
.PP
The command line and Lisp are one language.  A bare line is a command; a line
beginning with
.B (
or a backquote is a full Lisp form evaluated in the
.B consh
package, so the shell's whole vocabulary (\c
.BR pipe ,
.BR file\-size ,
.BR table ,
\&...) is available unqualified at the prompt.  Anything you can type
interactively you can also write as Lisp, because the surface syntax simply
desugars to the underlying pipeline and job forms.
.SH INVOCATION
.B consh
takes no command\-line arguments; run it to start a read\-eval\-print loop.
On startup it, in order:
.IP \(bu 3
adopts the current working directory of the process that launched it
(see
.B "NON\-POSIX NOTES"
on the no\-\c
.BR chdir (2)
design);
.IP \(bu 3
loads the user init file (see
.BR CONFIGURATION );
.IP \(bu 3
restores command history from disk (see
.BR FILES );
.IP \(bu 3
takes ownership of the controlling terminal for job control, if standard input
is a terminal.
.PP
When standard input is an interactive terminal, consh uses its full line editor
(editing keys, completion, history, autosuggestions, syntax highlighting).  When
standard input is a pipe or file, it reads plain lines with no editing \(em so a
script can be fed on standard input.  To run a file of shell lines from within a
session, use the
.B source
builtin.
.SH COMMAND LANGUAGE
.SS Commands and Lisp
Every non\-empty line that does not begin with
.B (
or backquote is a command line.  A line that does begin with one of those is
read as exactly one Lisp form and evaluated; trailing text after the form, or an
unbalanced form, is an error (an unbalanced form instead continues on the next
line \(em see
.BR "Multi\-line input" ).
.SS Escaping to Lisp
Inside a command line,
.BI , form
and
.BI $( form )
evaluate the Lisp
.I form
and splice its value in as an argument.  For example
.B "echo $(string\-upcase \(dqhi\(dq)"
prints
.BR HI ,
and
.B "grep ,*pattern* file"
passes the value of the Lisp variable
.B *pattern*
as grep's pattern.
.SS Pipelines and background
.B |
builds a pipeline.  Adjacent external commands are grouped so that they share a
single kernel
.BR pipe (2)
\(em bytes go kernel\-to\-kernel, never through Lisp, at the same cost as any other
shell.  Where a Lisp stage sits between externals, objects cross the boundary
instead of text.  A trailing
.B &
runs the pipeline in the background as a job (see
.BR JOBS ).
.SS Redirection
Redirections are applied in command\-line order (this matters for descriptor
duplication):
.TP
.B < file
Standard input from
.IR file .
.TP
.B > file
Standard output to
.IR file ,
truncating it.
.TP
.B >> file
Standard output appended to
.IR file .
.TP
.B 2> file ", " 2>> file
Standard error to (or appended to)
.IR file .
.TP
.B 2>&1
Redirect standard error to wherever standard output currently goes.
.TP
.B >&2 ", " 1>&2
Redirect standard output to wherever standard error currently goes.
.TP
.B &> file ", " &>> file ", " >& file
Send both standard output and standard error to
.IR file .
.PP
Because order is significant,
.B "cmd > f 2>&1"
sends both streams to
.IR f ,
whereas
.B "cmd 2>&1 > f"
sends only standard output to
.IR f
(standard error keeps the terminal).  Builtins ignore redirections.
.SS Expansion
Words are expanded in this order: alias, tilde, variable, glob.
.TP
.B $NAME\fR, \fB${NAME}
The value of environment variable
.IR NAME ,
or empty if unset.
.TP
.B ~\fR, \fB~/path\fR, \fB~user\fR, \fB~user/path
Home directory of the current user, or of
.IR user .
An unknown user is left literal.
.TP
.B * ? [set] [!set]
Filename globbing.  Character sets and negated sets are supported, as are
directory components: \fB*/\fR, \fBsrc/*/x\fR, and a trailing \fB/\fR that
restricts matches to directories.  A pattern that matches nothing is left
literal (as in most shells).  Relative patterns yield relative results.
.SS Quoting
Single (\fB\(aq\fR) and double (\fB\(dq\fR) quotes group a run of characters into
one word and are stripped.  An unterminated quote is treated as incomplete input
and continues on the next line.
.SS Aliases
.B "alias name=expansion"
defines an alias; a command whose first word is an alias has the expansion
spliced in.  Aliases are expanded once (no recursion), at the front of the
command only.
.SS Comments
In a file read by
.BR source ,
a line whose first non\-blank character is
.B #
is ignored, as are blank lines.
.SH OBJECTS, NOT BYTES
A per\-command parser protocol turns each wrapped command's output into objects
at the boundary.  For example
.B ls
prints only names, so its wrapper parses them and
.BR stat (2)s
each in\-process to return
.B file\-info
objects carrying size, mtime, and owner.  Wrapped commands include:
.BR cat ,
.BR date ,
.BR df ,
.BR du ,
.BR find ,
.BR git ,
.BR grep ,
.BR ls ,
.BR lsblk ,
.BR ps ,
.BR sed ,
.BR stat ,
and
.BR wc .
An unwrapped command falls back to lines of text.  Some wrappers translate
GNU/BSD dialects (for instance
.B stat
picks \fB\-c\fR or \fB\-f\fR, and
.B "date \-d @N"
is rewritten to
.B "date \-r N"
on BSD).
.PP
Pipelines can also contain in\-image Lisp stages that need no subprocess, written
in the
.B pipe
DSL:
.BR :map ,
.BR :filter ,
.BR :mapcat ,
.BR :emit ,
.BR :grep ,
.BR :cat ,
.BR :sort ,
and
.BR :uniq .
.SS Presentation
By default, when a command's result is a uniform stream of one wrapped type it
is rendered as an aligned table (with a bold header on a terminal); a mixed or
unwrapped stream prints one element per line, and a scalar prints readably.  The
.B table
function forces or customizes tabulation, e.g.
.BR "(table objs :columns \(aq((\(dqSZ\(dq . file\-size)))" .
.SH BUILTIN COMMANDS
.TP
.BI "cd " "[dir]"
Change directory.  With no argument, go to
.BR $HOME ;
.B cd \-
returns to the previous directory.  Handles
.B ~
and consults
.B $CDPATH
for a bare relative name not present in the current directory.  Directory
changes are per\-shell state; the process working directory never changes.
.TP
.B pwd
Print the current directory.
.TP
.BI "pushd " "[dir]"
Change to
.IR dir ,
pushing the current directory onto the directory stack; with no argument, swap
the top two.  Prints the stack.
.TP
.B popd
Change to the directory popped off the stack.
.TP
.B dirs
List the directory stack (current directory first).
.TP
.BI "export " "NAME=VALUE ..."
Set environment variables (inherited by spawned commands).
.TP
.BI "unset " "NAME ..."
Remove environment variables.
.TP
.BI "alias " "[NAME=EXPANSION ...]"
Define aliases, or with no argument list the current ones.
.TP
.BI "unalias " "NAME ..."
Remove aliases.
.TP
.B jobs
List background and stopped jobs (as job objects).
.TP
.BI "fg " "[%job]"
Resume a job in the foreground, handing it the terminal.
.TP
.BI "bg " "[%job]"
Resume a stopped job in the background.
.TP
.BI "kill " "[\-SIG] %job|pid"
Send a signal (name or number, default
.BR TERM )
to a job or process.
.TP
.BI "wait " "[%job]"
Wait for a job (or, with no argument, all jobs) to finish.
.TP
.B history
List past command forms.
.TP
.BI "source " file
Run each line of
.I file
as shell input (comments and blank lines skipped).  Also spelled
.BR . .
.TP
.BI "type " "NAME ..."
Report how each name resolves: shell builtin, alias, wrapped command, a
.B $PATH
executable, or not found.
.TP
.BI "which " "NAME ..."
Print the path of each external
.IR NAME .
.TP
.BI "help " "[NAME ...]"
List the builtins, or describe the named ones.
.TP
.BI "exit " "[N]"
Leave the shell with status
.I N
(default 0).
.PP
.B Auto\-cd:
a bare line naming an existing directory (that is not also a builtin, alias, or
command) changes into it, as if
.BR "cd dir" .
Controlled by the
.B *auto\-cd*
variable.
.SH LINE EDITING
On a terminal, consh provides an Emacs\-style line editor.
.SS Key bindings
.TP
.BR "Ctrl\-A" ", " "Ctrl\-E"
Move to start / end of line.
.TP
.BR "Left" ", " "Right" ", " "Home" ", " "End"
Move by character or to line ends.
.TP
.BR "Alt\-B" ", " "Alt\-F"
Move backward / forward by word.
.TP
.BR "Ctrl\-K" ", " "Ctrl\-U"
Kill to end of line / the whole line.
.TP
.BR "Ctrl\-W" ", " "Alt\-D"
Kill the previous / next word.
.TP
.B Ctrl\-Y
Yank (paste) the most recent kill.
.TP
.B Ctrl\-T
Transpose the two characters around the cursor.
.TP
.B Ctrl\-L
Clear the screen.
.TP
.BR "Up" ", " "Down"
Browse history; a stashed line is restored past the newest entry.
.TP
.B Ctrl\-R
Incremental reverse history search; press
.B Ctrl\-R
again for older matches,
.B Enter
to accept and run,
.B Ctrl\-C
to restore the line.
.TP
.B Tab
Complete the current token; press
.B Tab
again to cycle through the candidates.
.TP
.BR "Ctrl\-C" ", " "Ctrl\-D"
Abort the current line / end of input (on an empty line, exit).
.SS Completion
.B Tab
completes commands (builtins, aliases, wrappers, and
.B $PATH
executables), Lisp symbols after a
.B ,
or
.BR ( ,
environment names after
.BR $ ,
and
.BR ~/ \-relative
and other file paths.  Repeated
.B Tab
cycles the candidate list.
.SS Autosuggestions
As you type, the tail of the most recent matching history entry is shown dim
after the cursor;
.B Right
or
.B End
accepts it.  Controlled by
.BR *autosuggest* .
.SS Syntax highlighting
The command line is coloured as you type: the command word green when it
resolves and red when it does not, quoted strings yellow, and operators and
.B $VAR
references cyan.  Controlled by
.BR *highlight* .
.SS Multi\-line input
An unbalanced Lisp form or an unterminated quote is treated as incomplete: consh
prompts for continuation lines (with
.BR *continuation\-prompt* ,
default
.BR "...> " )
and accumulates them until the input parses.
.B Ctrl\-C
on a continuation aborts the whole input.
.SH THE PROMPT
The prompt is produced by the zero\-argument function in
.BR *prompt\-function* .
Ready\-made building blocks (all plain functions) compose one from Lisp:
.BR prompt\-cwd ,
.BR prompt\-cwd\-base ,
.BR prompt\-user ,
.BR prompt\-host ,
.BR prompt\-git\-branch
(reads
.BR .git/HEAD ,
no subprocess),
.BR prompt\-time ,
.BR prompt\-jobs ,
and
.B prompt\-exit\-status
(empty on success, else the last foreground command's exit code).
.B colorize
wraps text in an ANSI colour; the editor measures the prompt's visible width, so
colours never shift the cursor.
.SH CONFIGURATION
consh is configured in Lisp.  At startup it loads
.RB $ XDG_CONFIG_HOME /consh/consh.lisp
(or
.IR ~/.config/consh/consh.lisp )
in the
.B consh
package.  A broken init file is reported and skipped, never blocking startup.
Useful variables to set there:
.TP
.B *prompt\-function*
The prompt (see
.BR "THE PROMPT" ).
.TP
.B *continuation\-prompt*
Prompt shown for multi\-line continuation lines.
.TP
.B *auto\-cd*
Enable bare\-directory auto\-cd (default on).
.TP
.B *autosuggest*
Enable history autosuggestions (default on).
.TP
.B *highlight*
Enable syntax highlighting (default on).
.TP
.B *present\-color*
Bold table headers (set from terminal interactivity).
.TP
.B *history\-file* ", " *history\-max*
Where history persists, and how many entries are kept (default 1000).
.TP
.B *load\-init\-file*
When NIL, skip loading the init file.
.PP
You can also define aliases, register command wrappers, and define builtins
there.  Example
.IR ~/.config/consh/consh.lisp :
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
(in\-package :consh)

(define\-alias "ll" "ls \-l")

(setf *prompt\-function*
      (lambda ()
        (let ((branch (prompt\-git\-branch))
              (status (prompt\-exit\-status)))
          (format nil "~A~@[ ~A~]~@[~A~]> "
                  (colorize (prompt\-cwd) :bright\-blue t)
                  (and branch (colorize branch :green))
                  (unless (string= status "")
                    (colorize (format nil " [~A]" status) :red t))))))
.EE
.RE
.SH JOBS
Background jobs (started with
.BR & ,
or stopped with
.B Ctrl\-Z
in the foreground) are first\-class objects tracked in a registry;
.BR jobs ,
.BR fg ,
.BR bg ,
.BR kill ,
and
.B wait
operate on them.  Job control performs a genuine
.BR tcsetpgrp (3)
handoff of the terminal.  A background job's output is buffered in a bounded
ring so an unbounded producer keeps only its most recent objects.
.PP
An unhandled condition in a worker thread
.I parks
the job rather than crashing it, with the stack \(em and therefore its restarts
\(em intact.  You can inspect the parked job at the prompt and use
.B debug\-job
to resume it end\-to\-end by choosing a restart, run in the worker's own context.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B PATH
Searched for external commands and for command completion.
.TP
.B CDPATH
Colon\-separated directories consulted by
.B cd
for a bare relative target not found in the current directory.
.TP
.B HOME
Used for
.B ~
expansion and as the default target of
.BR cd .
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Base of the configuration directory; defaults to
.IR ~/.config .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/consh/consh.lisp
User init file, loaded at startup (honours
.BR $XDG_CONFIG_HOME ).
.TP
.I ~/.config/consh/history
Persistent command history.
.SH EXIT STATUS
The
.B exit
builtin sets the shell's exit status.  Within a session, the exit status of the
most recent foreground command is available as
.B prompt\-exit\-status
(and the variable
.BR *last\-status* ),
so a prompt can display it.
.SH EXAMPLES
Filter file objects by a Lisp predicate on a typed slot, then render a table:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
consh> (table (pipeline\-collect
               (pipe (ls) (:filter (lambda (f) (> (file\-size f) 4096))))))
.EE
.RE
.PP
A familiar external pipeline whose
.B grep
tail is enriched into objects (line number and text):
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
consh> seq 1 5 | grep 3
FILE  LINE  TEXT
\-\-\-\-  \-\-\-\-  \-\-\-\-
         3  3
.EE
.RE
.PP
Fold the sizes that
.B find
returns into a byte total, in Lisp, over objects:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
consh> (reduce #\(aq+ (pipeline\-collect (pipe (find "."))) :key #\(aqfile\-size)
.EE
.RE
.PP
Redirections, globs, and variable expansion look familiar:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
consh> sort < in.txt > out.txt
consh> echo $HOME/notes
consh> cat *.txt
.EE
.RE
.SH NON\-POSIX NOTES
consh is not a drop\-in POSIX shell, by design:
.IP \(bu 3
Pipelines carry objects, not bytes; a command's default output is objects (often
a table), not a fixed text format.
.IP \(bu 3
There is no
.BR chdir (2):
.B cd
updates per\-shell state and spawned children are given their directory at spawn
time, so the process working directory is never mutated.
.IP \(bu 3
Command sequencing and conditionals are Lisp, not shell operators: there is no
.BR ; ,
.BR && ,
or
.BR || .
Use Lisp forms such as
.BR progn ,
.BR and ,
.BR or ,
and
.B when
(a
.B (
line is full Lisp).
.IP \(bu 3
Control flow, functions, and variables are Lisp, not a shell scripting dialect.
.IP \(bu 3
Builtins ignore redirections.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sbcl (1)
.PP
The project README documents the design and internals in depth.
.SH AUTHOR
Matthew Kennedy <burnsidemk@gmail.com>.
.SH LICENSE
MIT.
